ULC in details (#146)
status-im/status.im: source/research/ulc_in_details.md

The verification has 2 steps: init caches and verify. Let's describe them in details.

##### Init step
_All numbers below are given for the Epoch 232 (a current epoch at 12 Nov 2018)_
_Some parts of this step can be run in parallel._
_All numbers and the algorithm steps are from [geth code](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/consensus/ethash/consensus.go#L239)_

It runs once per epoch: `epochLength = 30000 blocks ~ each 3.5 days = twice per week`

It needs to generate a verification matrix of pseudo-random values (it called `cache`).

Calculate seedHash in `epochNumber steps = 232 sha3 operations`
Calculate the initial cache in:  `cacheSize/64 steps = 51641792/64 = 806900 sha3 operations`. `CacheSize` can be taken from [table `cacheSizes`](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/consensus/ethash/algorithm.go#L821), for `epoch=232` it equals `51641792`.

At the end of the day $O_{cpu}(initStep)= N*O(sha3)$, where N is a current block number.

For example, for epoch 232 (a current epoch at 12 Nov 2018) $O_{cpu}(initStep) = O_{cpu}(seedHash)+O_{cpu}(initCahce) = 807133*O(sha3)$

> This is theoretical lower bound. [Ethash article](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethash-Design-Rationale) mentioned that "a light client should be able to become fully operational and able to verify blocks within 40 seconds in Javascript".

Author: Ethhash design rationale

### LES servers (untrusted)
LES servers - usual LES servers, a header chain is synchronised with them. Helps to prevent attacks on trusted servers.

### ULC client
1. has some CHT root at the start; has a CHTs "chain", that can be synced from LES servers; CHT chain allows to request any historical information (block, transaction, receipt) from LES server
2. trusts to announcements, that receives from N Trusted LES servers. Announcements should be signed by Trusted LES servers. It should be at least M identical announcements to trust.
3. Asks for announcements with the biggest TD
4. ULC client starts CHT sync before syncing header chain. ULC client requests newer CHTs from LES servers.
5. requests headers from untrusted LES server, starting from `the highest block is known to latest CHT + 1` up to latest block number known from trusted announce
6. ULC client validates:
6.1. announcements checking are there M the same announcements from N received from Trusted LES servers

> 6.2. doesn't validate CHT, if we get incorrect CHT, it'll be clear later after receiving block headers.

Author: OK, done.

* headers chain of blocks of the latest Epoch

## Security
### Main issues
1) Mostly are inherited from LES
2) Too few LES servers in the Network
3) Trusted servers discovery (?)
4) DoS on trusted nodes

### Sybill attack on ULC (client)
Prevented because it is already prevented in a classic LES model and we only download headers with trusted announcements.

### Sybill attack on trusted servers
Even less possible than in LES model because it's needed to attack,k at least M servers.

### DoS on trusted servers
Possible. ULC makes it much less possible by hiding what nodes are trusted for each user. A user doesn't send any unusual for LES information to LES servers trusted or untrusted. Any trusted for a user LES server doesn't know that it has been chosen by the user to be trusted LES server.

### MITM
Prevented because all announcements must be signed by according LES server.

### What other security guarantees does ULC give and what is it comparable with?

#### Some math
There're 2 kinds of security guarantees:
1. reducing the probability of failure to perform a correct request due to the failure of remote servers - failure and censorship resistance

> 2. reducing the probability of trust in data coming from malicious nodes

Author: You're right. Fixed.

| 1000    | 4    | 160    | 16 | 
| 1000    | 5    | 200    | 20 | 
| 1000    | 6    | 240    | 24 | 
| 1000    | 7    | 280    | 28 | 
| 5000    | 4    | 800    | 80 | 
| 5000    | 5    | 1000    | 100 | 
| 5000    | 6    | 1200    | 120 | 
| 5000    | 7    | 1400    | 140 | 
| 10000    | 4    | 1600    | 160 | 
| 10000    | 5    | 2000    | 200 | 
| 10000    | 6    | 2400    | 240 | 
| 10000    | 7    | 2800    | 280 | 

It's obvious that scaling due to server expansion inside the service is strictly limited. A prerequisite for the operation of ULC at large scales is an increase in the percentage of LES of servers relative to all Ethereum servers.

At the moment there are 15000 nodes. If 30% of them would use the LES server option, more than 300 000 ULC users could be handled simultaneously.

## Benchmarks
Our beta test showed that ULC sync is ~10x times [faster than LES](https://youtu.be/Z6UUT1TqdTs?t=623)

## Plans
### Short-Term
Status.im is going to start using ULC to achieve greater censorship resistance and enable all possible `web3` features for DApps and developers.

### Long-Term
* [On ULC incentives](https://hackmd.io/6IhsF6zRSqmtggvNnp1sHQ)

> * Ethereum services are going to have microtransactions and it will make possible to make a market of LES server quotas using [LES service model](https://github.com/zsfelfoldi/ethereum-docs/blob/master/les/service_model.md#continous-auction)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ethereum services are going to have microtransactions and this will make possible to create a market of LES server quotas using the proposed [LES service model](https://github.com/zsfelfoldi/ethereum-docs/blob/master/les/service_model.md#continous-auction)
```

1. sanity check that the provided chain is actually ordered and linked. If we have a header chain of length N, for every $n_i$ and $n_{i-1}$, $i \epsilon [0; N]$, conditions should hold:
    1.1. $n_i.Number = n_{i-1}.Number+1$
    1.2. $n_i.ParentHash = n_{i-1}.Hash$
2. in Ethereum Yellow Paper section 4.3.4. "Block Header Validity"[\[2\]][2]
    2.1. The length of $n_i.Extra < 32 bytes$
    2.2. Checks block timestamp:
        2.2.1. It shouldn't be from future more than 15 secs
        2.2.2. $n_i.Time > n_{i-1}.Time$
    2.3. verify the block's difficulty based on it's timestamp and parent block's difficulty: $n_i.Difficulty = expectedDifficulty(n_i)$
    2.4. $n_i.gasLimit$ shouldn't overflow `2^63-1`
    2.5. $n_i.gasUsed <= n_i.gasLimit$
    2.6. checks gas limit:
        2.6.1. should be more than MinGasLimit: $n_i.gasLimit >= 5000$
        2.6.2. the change of $n_i$ gas should be bounded: $|parent.GasLimit - header.GasLimit| < parent.GasLimit / 1024$
    2.7. validate hard forks special fields, eg. every $n_i \epsilon [DAOForkBlock; DAOForkBlock+10]$ should have special value in `ExtraData` field 
    2.8. Verify a seal securing the block

#### Verify a seal of a block

> The main improvement of ULC is that a client doesn't need to verify the seal of a block and can skip this step at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main difference of ULC is that a client doesn't need to verify the seal of a block and can skip this step at all.
```
let's stay neutral in tech docs like this

Reviewer: `difference in ULC` in that case @JekaMas and then we can merge!! 🎉 ❤️
